# 3. Transition State (TS) Geometry Optimization
Transition state geometry optimizations in gaussian look to find a first-order saddle point on the PES (i.e. a maximum in one direction, but a minimum in all other). It does this using first and second order derivatives. Geometry optimizations will continue until a) a stationary point is reached on the potential energy surface (PES) (stationary points includes TSs and minima) b) an error causes the job to end early or c) the maximum number of geometry iterations is reached.
## References
Opt keyword info: [https://gaussian.com/opt/] (see the TS option for more information about TS optimizations)

Freq keyword info: [https://gaussian.com/freq/]

## Files necessary
```.com or .gjf and .sh (not necessary if using python submit script)```

## Keywords and Usage
There are two mandatory keyword for geometry optimizations which are ```opt=(ts,calcfc,noeigentest) and freq=noraman```. ```opt=(ts,calcfc,noeigentest)``` asks gaussian to do a geometry optimization searching for a first-order saddle point on the PES. The optional keywords ```calcfc and noeigentest``` are recommended here in every job to speed up the search and make it more likely to find a TS. Adding the option and ```freq=noraman``` asks guassian to calculate the frequencies on the last structure generated by the optimization procedure. This last keyword is required to confirm the final structure as a TS (more about that in the analysis).

### Optional Keywords
Within the "opt" keyword, there are a number of optional modifiers that may aid your calculation. To use these, add them to the opt keyword in this way: ```opt=(OPTION1,OPTION2,OPTION3,...)```. Information for all options can be found here: [https://gaussian.com/opt/]
1. maxstep=X - This option reduces or increases the maximum distance the procedure can move atoms between iterations. This useful difficult to find TSs which have a tendancy to collapse towards the reactants or products. The default is 30 which corresponds to 0.3 bohr or radian units.

## Analysis
1. Check the end of the ```.log``` file to confirm it has the line ```Normal Termination of Gaussian 16```, which confirms that the job finished successfully. If you do not have this line at the end of your file that means that the calculations failed (see common error messages to resolve this).
2. Open the ```.log``` file with GaussView. Right-click in the blue space to open the options and go down to "Results". Then click on "Vibrations...". This will bring up a box which shows the vibrational data of your molecule. You need to check that the first frequency is negative (<0) and that all other frequencies are positive (>0). This indicates that the electronic energy of the molecule increases all but one direction on the highly dimensional PES (i.e. that the structure is a TS).
3. Next click on the "Start Animation" button. This will visualize the vibrational modes of the molecule (i.e. show how it wiggles). It is very important for the vibrational movement of the negative frequency to correspond with the correct chemical transformation/reaction you want. This indicates the correct TS has been found (though an IRC calculation proves this more definitively). 
    1. In many cases irrelevant TSs will instead be found by gaussian. Many times these are conformational TSs (i.e. eclipsed alkyl groups). This indicates that your initial structure was not close enough to the "true" TS for that method.
    2. The magnitude of the negative frequency can also be important. This gives an idea of the steepness of the PES near the TS (higher magnitudes indicate larger slopes). Shallow PESs generally have much smaller magnitudes for their imaginary (negative) frequencies, which can make classification of the TS more difficult, especially in the IRC analysis. 
4. Next, open the ```.log``` file in bash and type ```/```. This does a forward search (like ctrl+f) of the file.
5. In some cases, the optimization plot can be important. This is a plot of each iterative geometry and its electronic energy. To open this plot, right-click on the blank space, go to results, then click on "Optimization...". This plot can be especially useful in diagnosing errors when they arise. 

