# 1. Ground State (S0) Geometry Optimization
Ground state geometry optimizations in gaussian look to minimize the energy of a structure by varying geometric parameters in the molecule. It does this using first and sometimes second order derivatives. Geometry optimizations will continue until a) a stationary point is reached on the potential energy surface (PES) (stationary points includes TSs and minima) b) an error causes the job to end early or c) the maximum number of geometry iterations is reached.
## References
Opt keyword info: [https://gaussian.com/opt/]

Freq keyword info: [https://gaussian.com/freq/]

## Files necessary
```.com or .gjf and .sh (not necessary if using python submit script)```

## Keywords and Usage
The are two mandatory keyword for geometry optimizations which are ```opt and freq=noraman```. ```opt``` asks gaussian to do a geometry optimization (searching for a minimum energy structure by default) and ```freq=noraman``` asks guassian to calculate the frequencies on the last structure generated by the optimization procedure. This last keyword is required to confirm the final structure as a minimum (more about that in the analysis).

### Optional Keywords
Within the "opt" keyword, there are a number of optional modifiers that may aid your minimum geometry optimization. To use these, add them to the opt keyword in this way: ```opt=(OPTION1,OPTION2,OPTION3,...)```. Information for all options can be found here: [https://gaussian.com/opt/]
1. calcfc - This option calculates force constants for the molecule which can often speed up optimizations (more direct path to minimum can be found). This can be especially useful for shallow PESs (where large geometric changes result in small energetic changes)
2. maxstep=X - This option reduces or increases the maximum distance the procedure can move atoms between iterations. This useful for meta-stable intermediates which tend to collapse towards reactants or products. The default is 30 which corresponds to 0.3 bohr or radian units.

NoSymm - This is its own standalone keyword (i.e. does not fall within opt=()) and can sometimes be useful for large symmetric molecules, for which minima are difficult to locate normally. Sometimes repeated minimum searches all lead towards the same TS or non-minimum structure (one or more negative frequencies). In these cases, NoSymm can sometimes help optimize towards an actually minimum.

## Analysis
1. Check the end of the ```.log``` file to confirm it has the line ```Normal Termination of Gaussian 16```, which confirms that the job finished successfully. If you do not have this line at the end of your file that means that the calculations failed (see common error messages to resolve this).
2. Open the ```.log``` file with GaussView. Right-click in the blue space to open the options and go down to "Results". Then click on "Vibrations...". This will bring up a box which shows the vibrational data of your molecule. You need to check that the frequencies for all modes are >0. This indicates that the electronic energy of the molecule increases in every direction on the highly dimensional PES (i.e. that the structure is a minimum).
    1. In the rare case that the minimum optimization generates one or more negative frequencies, choose the manual displacement option in the vibrations menu. Then move the slider to slightly change the molecule's geometry. Click "Save Structure..." and save this as a new ```.com/gjf``` file and submit another minimum optimization.
3. Next, open the ```.log``` file in bash and type ```/```. This does a forward search (like ctrl+f) of the file.
4. In some cases, the optimization plot can be important. This is a plot of each iterative geometry and its electronic energy. To open this plot, right-click on the blank space, go to results, then click on "Optimization...". Ideally this graph shows an exponential decrease in energy, until no further decrease occurs (convergence), though don't panic if it looks different or jagged. This plot can be especially useful in diagnosing errors when they arise. 
